---
draft: false
toc: true
type: docs

title: qed block
linktitle: qed block
weight: 200
menu:
  documentation:
    parent: Input deck
    weight: 120
---

This block contains information about QED pair production. See [EPOCH
input deck][Input_deck] for more information on the
input deck.

EPOCH can model QED pair production, synchrotron emission and radiation
reaction as described in Duclous et al[^1] and Ridgers et al. [^2] It is
enabled using the compiler flag **`-DPHOTONS`**. Additionally, the
Trident process is enabled using **`-DTRIDENT_PHOTONS`**.

A new input deck block named "qed" has been added which accepts the
following parameters:

- `use_qed` - Logical flag which turns QED on or off. The
default is "F".

- `qed_start_time` - Floating point value specifying the
time after which QED effects should be turned on. The default is 0.

- `produce_photons` - Logical flag which specifies whether
to track the photons generated by synchrotron emission. If this is "F"
then the radiation reaction force is calculated but the properties of
the emitted photons are not tracked. The default is "F".

- `photon_energy_min` - Minimum energy of produced photons.
Radiation reaction is calculated for photons of all energies, but
photons with energy below this cutoff are not tracked. The default is 0.

- `photon_dynamics` - Logical flag which specifies whether
to push photons. If "F" then photons are generated, but their motion
through the domain is not simulated and they stay where they were
generated. The default is "F".

- `produce_pairs` - Logical flag which determines whether or
not to simulate the process of pair generation from gamma ray photons.
Both produce_photons and photon_dynamics must be "T" for this to work.
The default is "F".

- `qed_table_location` - EPOCH's QED routines use lookup
tables to calculate gamma ray emission and pair production. If you want
to use tables in a different location from the default, specify the new
location using this parameter. The default is
"src/physics_packages/TABLES".

- `use_radiation_reaction` - Logical flag which determines
whether or not to calculate the radiation reaction force. If set to "F"
then the force is not calculated. This should nearly always be enabled
when using the QED model. It is only provided for testing purposes. The
default value is "T".

QED also requires that the code now know which species are electrons,
positrons and photons. The species type is specified using a single
"identify" tag in a species block. To specify an electron the block in
the deck would look like

```perl
begin:species
   name = electron
   frac = 0.5
   number_density = 7.7e29
   identify:electron
end:species
```

Once the identity of a species is set then the code automatically
assigns mass and charge states for the species. Possible identities
are:
- `electron` - A normal electron species. All species of
electrons in the simulation must be identified in this way or they will
not generate photons.

- `positron` - A normal positron species. All species of
positron in the simulation must be identified in this way or they will
not generate photons.

- `photon` - A normal photon species. One species of this
type is needed for photon production to work. If multiple species are
present then generated photons will appear in the first species of this
type.

- `bw_electron` - The electron species for pair production
by the Breit-Wheeler process. If a species of this type exists then
electrons from the pair production module will be created in this
species. If no species of this type is specified then pair electrons
will be generated in the first electron species.

- `bw_positron` - As above but for positrons.

- `trident_electron` - The electron species for pair
production by the Trident process. If a species of this type exists then
electrons from the pair production module will be created in this
species. If no species of this type is specified then pair electrons
will be generated in the first electron species.

- `trident_positron` - As above but for positrons.

- `proton` - A normal proton species. This is for convenience
only and is not required by the pair production routines.
A species should be identified only once, so a "bw_electron" species
does not need to also be identified as an "electron" species. If the
code is running with "produce_photons=T" then a photon species must be
created by the user and identified. If the code is running with
"produce_pairs=T" then the code must specify at least one electron (or
bw_electron) species and one positron (or bw_positron) species. These
species will usually be defined with zero particles from the start of
the simulation and will accumulate particles as the simulation
progresses. The code will fail to run if the needed species are not
specified.

- `brem_photon` - A bremsstrahlung photon species. This is used by the bremsstrahlung radiation model. See the [bremsstrahlung][bremsstrahlung_deck] page.

- `bh_electron` - An electron produced in a Bethe-Heitler pair. See the [bremsstrahlung][bremsstrahlung_deck] page for more details.

- `bh_positron` - A positron produced in a Bethe-Heitler pair.
See the [bremsstrahlung][bremsstrahlung_deck] page for more details.

The basic input deck has now been considered fully but it is possible
for an end user to add new blocks to the input deck As a result, a
version of the code which you have obtained from a source other than the
GitHub server may include other input deck blocks. These should
be described in additional documentation provided with the version of
the code that you have.

# References

<references />

[^1]: R. Duclous, J. G. Kirk, and A. R. Bell, "Monte carlo calculations
    of pair production in high-intensity laserplasma interactions,"
    Plasma Phys. Contr. F., vol. 53, no. 1, p. 015009,
    2011[1](http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/0741-3335/53/1/015009).

[^2]: C. P. Ridgers, J. G. Kirk, R. Duclous, T. G. Blackburn, C. S.
    Brady, K. Bennett, T. D. Arber, A. R. Bell, "Modelling gamma-ray
    photon emission and pair production in high-intensity laser--matter
    interactions," J. Comp. Phys., vol. 260, p. 273-285,
    2014[2](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2013.12.007).



<!-- ########################  Cross references  ######################## -->


[Input_deck]: /documentation/input_deck/input_deck
[bremsstrahlung_deck]: /documentation/input_deck/input_deck_bremsstrahlung
